Alright so I mentioned in the last video
that we skimmed over a couple of things that I've done
in the prior class, so let's go back and have a look
at those in a bit more detail.
So I'm gonna open the player.py file, so the first thing
we did before adding the lives property was to hide
the lives data attribute by prefixing it with an underscore.
Now that's good practise so that the client code doesn't
try to access the attribute directly by mistake.
Now there's nothing to stop anyone from accessing
the underscore lives attribute, this is Python and nothing's
hidden, but you now have to do it deliberately.
So getting back to the main programme, I can actually
do something like tim._lives equals 9 print(tim)
and then run it, and you can see that that does work,
and obviously with the value of 9 there for lives.
So as I've said a few times, Python doesn't enforce
any idea of private variables.
You're free to change anything you want, but if the creator
of the class has hidden that data attribute by prefixing
it's name with an underscore, then you may cause problems
if you do go changing it.
So I'm gonna delete line 19, now watch what happens
when I retype it, you may have missed this the last time,
so if I type in tim., intellij is actually dropping down
the list of all the methods and attributes of the player
class that we might wanna change.
Now the list starts off as lives, level, name and score.
After that, there are attributes and methods that
our player class inherits from it's base class which
is object.
I'll come back to that a little bit later when we talk
about inheritance.
But notice though that the _lives doesn't appear anywhere
in the list, so we can access it if we know it's there,
but doing so accidentally is extremely unlikely.
Alright so I'll finish typing the line, _lives equals 9,
now there is another reason why we had to hide the lives
attribute, now the result if you forget to do so can be
extremely confusing if you're not aware of it.
So I'm gonna pretend that I forgot, so come over here
to the player class again.
Alright we're gonna make the change here on line 5,
so the easiest way is to get intelliJ to refactor it,
so I'm gonna right-click here on the _lives on line 5,
choose Refactor then Rename.
And all we need to do is delete the underscore from the
start of the line and click on Refactor, and that should
change the code there, you can see the code was changed
as I did that, we've got our self.lives equals 3 here,
we've got self.lives here on line 14 and also here
on line 17, self.lives as well.
Alright so let's switch back to main and run this again.
Now I'm sure that's probably not what you expected.
Let's put an end of line at the end of the script
so that it gets rid of that warning.
So the problem that starts here, the reason why it's crashed
test starts at line 3 of the player class.
Where we set lives equal to 3.
Now we've also got our property lives on line 19,
so when Python sees set lives equals 3, it calls the setter
with the value three, now inside the setter, here we're
talking about the code here on line 12, the set of code
which starts on line 13, the line self.lives equals lives
is executed, so Python knows the value of lives that we
pass to the setter is 3, so it calls the setter with
the value 3, and inside the setter is the line self.lives
equals lives, and you're probably getting the idea by now.
Getting back to looking at the error down here,
and we've got a recursion error, maximum recursion depth
exceeded, and that's because the setter keeps calling itself
recursively and there's no exit condition, so it just goes
round and round until it overflows the stack and that's
why we're getting this recursion error.
So the important point about all this is that the data
attribute mustn't have the same name as the property.
Now we could have renamed the lives attribute to anything,
as long as it wasn't the same name as we used for
the property, getting back to here on line 19.
So it makes sense just to put a print to just to prefix it
with an underscore because that hides the attribute as well.
Alright so let's go ahead now and rename the lives data
attribute back to _lives again.
Now we can obviously refactor again, but we can just use
CTRL + Z on a PC, or Command + Z on a Mac to undo
that renaming, so let's do that, making sure that we're
in player.py, we'll do Command + Z, undo remaining variable
_lives to lives?
That puts the change back to what it was before we changed
or renamed it, and if we go back to main.py, we should be
able to run this again now.
And you can see this time it's working as it was before.
So watch out for that, Python really isn't happy if you
give your property the same name as the data attribute
backing it.
Alright, so going back to player.py, the other thing
that I did skim over was setting that property here
on line 19 in player.py.
And that's fairly straightforward, just the name
of the property equals and a call to the properties
class constructor to create the new property.
Now I could hover the mouse over property and hold down
the CTRL key or command on a Mac, you can see what
the parameters are, but sometimes it's just easier
to jump into the source by clicking on it which I'll do now.
So the first parameter here is self, and that's because
we're using this inside a class definition, so we can skip
that, the next we specify up the three methods.
And as they say in the doc string below the underscore
underscore init method definition, if get is the name
down here, function that's used for getting the attribute
value, if set is the name of a function that will set
the value and if del identifies a function that can
be used to delete the attribute.
And the final parameter, doc over here, that's a doc string
you can use to provide a description of the property.
Now we don't have all four parameters, so if I need to
supply at the parameters to get and set
our lives properties.
You can see that on line 19.
Now a delete a method doesn't really make sense when dealing
with numbers, but could well be useful if the property
is a list and you wanted a quick way to clear out
all the items in the list.
One thing to watch out for though, looking at line 19 again,
is that you provide the names of the methods.
Now if you place opening and closing parentheses after
the names like this,
then you're actually calling the method and the property's
getter will be set to whatever the result of calling
get_lives is, almost certainly not anything useful.
I'll leave you to run the programme and see what happens
if you do with the parentheses instead of just passing
the method names.
Now IntelliJ warns us that this is a strange argument,
and that a callable is expected.
Which is slightly ironic considering it tries to add
the parentheses for us when we type the method names.
And just to show you that, you probably saw this before
but if I type _set_lives, it's automatically adding
the parentheses, so it's sort of missing the point here,
I will delete these two parentheses anyway.
Now if you don't specify a method to use for the setter,
then the property is gonna be read only which is sometimes
useful, now if you specify setter but no getter,
then you can change the value of the property but you can't
display it, and that's really the less useful,
possibly maybe for a password attribute.
If you can think of a use for a write only property,
then that's how you'd actually do it.
The other thing I want to mention is that STI method
and the strange replacement fields that I've used on line
21 and 22, now I've been using replacement fields in
the .format method a lot, but so far we've either used
just opening and closing braces, or put a number inside them
to indicate which of the values should go where.
But when dealing with classes, you can also use this form.
Now because the value supplied to format is an object,
in this case self, the current instance of our player class,
we only need to specify it once.
We can then access it's data attributes and properties
inside the replacement fields.
So I think you'd agree that the way we've got it there
is a lot more readable than another scenario which I'll
just copy and paste this code in.
Than that method there, and I'll just comment one of these
out to keep things happy.
So I think the first method, 0.name, 0.lives, 0.level,
is a lot more readable than that second version which
we've been using so far in the course.
I'll just put it back to where it was.
Alright so I think at this point, it's time for challenge.
So here's the challenge, so the challenge is to modify
the player class so that the player score is increased
to 1000 every time their level increases by one.
So if they jump up two levels, they'll get a bonus
of 2000 added to their score.
If the player drops back a level, they'll lose 1000
for each level they drop back.
They can't go below Level One, so your solution should
prevent that from happening.
So the aim of this challenge is to practise properties,
so although it may make more sense to add methods
to increase and decrease the level, please don't do it
that way, use a property.
Alright, so that's the challenge, see how you go with that,
pause the video now and I'll see you when you get back.
Alright, so because this video is about getters and setters,
the solution I was looking for is to create a property
for the level and then create the getter and a setter
to change the score as the level changes.
Now we're going to create a property called level,
so the first thing is to hide our level attribute
by renaming it to _level.
So I'm gonna right click the level on line 6 and refactor it
Rename, and we can rename it to _level.
Next we need to create a getter and set our methods.
So we're gonna add them under the getters and setters
methods for lives.
So def _get_level (self), and we've got a return,
self._level, so the getter's obviously trivial there,
we're just returning the value of the _level data attribute.
Now the setter on the other hand has to check that the new
level was greater than 0, then calculate the bonus that will
be added to the score, so let's go ahead and write that.
So def _set_level, adding self, and we also need to pass
the parameter level.
So I'm gonna start off by putting if level is greater than 0
then put delta equals level take self._level.
Then we wanna put self.score plus equals delta multiplied
by 1000, by 1000, and self.level, self._level I should say,
equals level, otherwise we're gonna put an else there,
print("Level can't be less than 1").
So if the new level is greater than 0, so 1 or more,
we subtract the current level from it to find out how much
it's increased by.
Now if the level's gone down, delta will be negative
and will be subtracting the bonus from the score,
otherwise the bonus is added to the score.
We're then updating the score and set the underscore level
attribute to the new value.
The last thing we have to do which I haven't done yet
is to define the property and tell it to use our two methods
as the getter and setter.
So let's go ahead and do that.
I'm gonna add this on line 31.
So level is equal to property _get_level and _set_level,
and it's almost like IntelliJ's got it in for us here,
because it's always trying to add a call to a method
when it offers it's suggestion as it did there.
So that's why I mentioned it earlier and I'm mentioning
it again now, we very definitely don't want the opening
and closing parentheses after the method names.
As that will result in the methods being called
and their return value used for getter and setter,
and it would be a very unusual getter that returned
a method, and even if it did, it's not likely to be one
that we'd want to use for our getter.
Now a setter doesn't specify a value to return so it would
return none, and the property setter would stay set to none.
So in both cases not something that we want to happen.
So just be very careful not to include the parentheses
when setting up your properties.
Alright so at this point now, I need to put a colon there
on line 27.
So at this point we can go back to our main.py and we
can actually test this out.
Alright so we're going to below the first definition
of setting the lives to 9.
Let's come down here and we're going to put tim.level
equals 2, print tim, then on the next line, tim.level
plus equals 5, print tim.
Now hopefully we get a score ere, so that's just you see
what it's doing.
And we can see that we've got the results here,
a score of 1000 then 6000 when we increase the level by 5
more which is correct.
Now decreasing the level should also work because
I have delta, let's confirm that, tim.level equals 3,
print tim.
The level's going down by a total of 4, so our score
is going down by 4000 in this case.
So if your solution produces the same results,
even if your code is different tomorrow,
then congratulations, challenge passed.
Alright, now there's one more thing that I need to talk
about for these properties, but let's look at doing that
in the next video.